IN THE HIGH COURT OF SOUTH AFRICA
(EASTERN CAPE LOCAL DIVISION: MTHATHA)
In the matter between:
CASE NO. 178/2015
TANDIKHAYA KETWA APPLICANT
VS
MEC FOR HEALTH & 2 OTHERS RESPONDENTS
JUDGMENT
DAWOOD, J:
1. The Applicant herein sought an order in the following terms:-
“
1. That Applicant’s non-compliance with the Uniform Rules of Court as
regards time frames, forms and service be and is hereby condoned and
that leave be and is hereby granted to the Applicant to bring this
application on the abridged terms;
1
2. That the Respondents’ termination of Applicant from his employment be
declared unlawful and set aside;
3. That the Respondent be and are hereby directed to re-instate forthwith the
Applicant to his position as Senior Assistant Director in the same terms
and conditions as before.
4. That the 1st Respondent be and is hereby directed to pay the Applicant all
his salary as from June 2013.
5. That the Respondent pay costs of this application.
6. Granting to the Applicant such further and/or alternative relief as to this
honourable court may deem meet.”
2. The Respondent raised the following points in limine:-
a) That this court lacked jurisdiction in that:-
i) This is an employer and employee relationship;
ii) That the Applicant did not rely on a breach of contract; and
iii) That accordingly the High Court does not have concurrent
jurisdiction with the Labour Court to adjudicate upon the
matter.
b) That the Applicant failed to exhaust internal remedies having regard to
the fact that:
i) His termination was by operation of law in terms of section 17
(3) (a) of the Public Services Act of 1994;
ii) That section 17 (3) (b) provides an employee who presents
himself for duties after his deemed dismissal an opportunity to
report for work and to be re-instated on good cause shown;
iii) That the Applicant failed to present himself for work and
accordingly failed to comply with section 17 (3) (b); and
iv) The court accordingly cannot adjudicate over the matter until
the Applicant’s internal remedies have been exhausted.
2
3. That there was undue delay in light of the fact that the Applicant’s
termination took effect in July 2013 and he only approached his attorney
in November 2014 and the Respondent sought a dismissal of the
Application on that basis.
4. The matter was set down for the determination of the points raised in
limine by the Respondent.
5. I shall deal with each of the points raised in turn:
A) Jurisdiction:
i) The Applicant has stated, correctly or incorrectly, that his
constitutional rights were infringed and his rights were also
infringed in terms of PAJA (Promotion of Administrative
Justice Act 3 of 2000).
ii) It is trite law that this court has concurrent jurisdiction with
the Labour Court where there is a claim for the enforcement
of contractual and constitutional rights of a party1.
iii) I am disposed to accept that there are sufficient averments on
the papers to give this court concurrent jurisdiction with the
Labour Court to adjudicate upon the application although that
jurisdictional facts and basis could have been elucidated in
clearer terms, the court does not have to consider whether or
not the points have merit or were properly raised in order to
determine jurisdiction but simply whether it was raised and
gave issue that can be adjudicated upon by this court. The
Applicants have done so in this case. The court does not need
to, when determining the issue of jurisdiction, decide upon
whether or not contractual or constitutional rights were
breached.
1 Makhanya v University of Zululand 2010 (1) SA 62 (SCA) at 71
3
iv) The Respondent’s first point in limine on lack of jurisdiction
is accordingly dismissed.
B) FAILURE TO EXHAUST INTERNAL REMEDIES:
i) The Applicant in paragraph 9 of his founding affidavit states
that the letter delivered to his house on 26 June 2013
purportedly terminated his employment and refers to annexure
TK1 as confirmation of the same.
ii) Annexure TK1 in fact calls upon the Applicant to respond in
writing as to why his absence cannot be taken as unauthorised
leave of absence which could result in abscondment if he
continues with this behaviour and he is required to submit
himself to the sub-district manager within 5 working days.
iii) TK1 is not a letter of termination.
iv) The Applicant states he received TK1 in July 2013, however he
has failed to state when in July he received this letter and
whether or not he at that stage:-
a) responded in writing thereto; and
b) submitted himself to the sub-district manager upon receipt
of the letter.
v) I do not propose to deal with the merits as to whether or not the
Applicant has established that his services were wrongfully
terminated or not but clearly this letter is not what it purports to
be, that is, a letter of termination and all the arguments based on
the contents of this letter by the Applicant’s representative
regarding it not complying with section 17 (1) with regard to the
mandatory period of absence before one is regarded as having
absconded, has to be disregarded in the circumstances.
vi) It is evident from the annexures put up by the Applicant that the
Respondent relies on the provisions of section 17 (1) of the
4
Public Services Act 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) as
the basis for termination, that is, the deemed dismissal of the
Applicant due to his failure to report to work for a period of 30
days.
vii) The Applicant has failed to allege that he reported for duty after
his deemed dismissal and showed good cause for his re-
instatement in his former position.
viii) Annexure TK2 also bears reference to a letter requesting the
reversal of abscondment not re-instatement on good cause.
ix) The Applicant persisted in alleging that his termination was
wrongful as is evidenced from paragraph 10 of his founding
affidavit.
x) The Applicant has alleged that he wrote a letter to the second
Respondent after September 2013 but he fails to annex a copy
of the same neither has he stated what was contained therein.
xi) The Applicant on his own version has failed to comply with
section 17 (3) (b) of the Public Services Act, if he has regard to
the following:-
a) the Applicant failed to state that he indeed presented
himself for work after the deemed dismissal;
b) he accordingly failed to present reasons to justify a
reversal of the decision to dismiss due to abscondment;
and
c) the employer accordingly was not given an opportunity
to accept or reject those reasons as constituting or not
constituting good cause.
xii) The Applicant has annexed a leave form and a medical
certificate as well as a letter to show that he was present on the
11th of July 2013 for working purposes at the clinic,
5
xiii) The leave form is not signed by the employer as having been
authorised and the letter is dated 11 March 2014 pertaining to
him being on duty on the 11 July 2013 so this letter could not
have been presented prior thereto nor is it alleged that it was
presented,
xiv) The medical certificate is dated the 17th of July 2013 on the day
that the Respondent stated that the letter of termination was
given,
xv) The Applicant does not state whether the medical certificates
was obtained before or after service of the letter of termination,
xvi) The Applicant also fails to state whether or not the medical
certificate was submitted to his supervisor,
xvii) The Applicant also does not state that he in fact returned to
work on the 20th of July 2013,
xviii) The Applicant, far more importantly, fails to state that he
reported for work and furnished these explanations to his
employer when he was informed that his absence was taken as
abscondment in term section 17 (1) of the Act and he was
accordingly deemed to have absconded, is automatically
dismissed unless the employer directed otherwise2 even without
being notified of the same by his employer,
xix) The Applicant was obliged to follow the procedure set out in
section 17 (3) by operation of law,
xx) The Applicant does not indicate anywhere that he has complied
with these provisions and exhausted the internal remedies prior
to approaching this court for relief nor has he sought
condonation for failure to exhaust internal remedies,
2Minister van Onderwys en Kultuur v Louw 1995 (4) SA 383 (A)
Sindezama Mathew Mbobo v Minister of Education and others E.C.D case number 396/2000
6
xxi) The point, in my view, that he failed to exhaust internal
remedies is accordingly properly raised, and
xxii) The point in limine raised by the Respondent that the Applicant
has come to court prematurely by failing to first exhaust internal
remedies available to him has been properly raised and his
failure to exhaust internal remedies accordingly warrants the
dismissal. This point in limine is accordingly upheld.
C) Undue delay:
i) There is no need to deal with the final point in limine regarding
undue delay in light of the finding in respect of the Applicant’s
failure to exhaust internal remedies but I shall deal with it for the
sake of completeness.
a) The Applicant has put up some flimsy grounds for his failure
to launch the application within a reasonable period, without
any substantiation of the grounds or confirmation by the union
representative.
b) The Applicant in any event has failed to apply for condonation
for the late launching of the Application.
c) The Applicant was as per the letters from the Respondent
“dismissed” on 18th July 2013.
d) The only response to his union representative that is put, is a
letter dated 12th September 2013. The next letter that is
annexed is one written on the 10th November 2014 and a
response given on the 18th November 2014. The Application
was only launched on the 23rd of January 2015, two months
after the response was given and more than a year and a half
after the termination.
7
e) The period of time from the date of dismissal to date of
launching the application, a period in excess of 18 months,
constitutes an inordinate delay.
f) This period of time is unreasonable and warrants a proper full
explanation and the seeking of condonation for the delay as
part of the substantive relief sought in the notice of motion
which was not done in this case.
g) The Applicant failed to do so.
h) The Respondent also insofar as it may be necessary to make a
ruling on this point as well accordingly succeeds on this point
in limine regarding inordinate delay in launching the
Application.
i) The Application is accordingly dismissed on that basis of
inordinate delay as well.
6. The Respondent failed on the first point in limine and succeeded in
respect of the other two points in limine raised.
7. I am in light of that fact that the Applicant was successful on at least one
point disposed to exercising my discretion and ordering each party to pay
they own costs.
8. I accordingly make the following order:
i) The Application is dismissed;
ii) Each party to pay his/its own costs.
____________
DAWOOD J
JUDGE OF THE HIGH COURT
8
DATE HEARD: 28 JULY 2016
JUDGMENT DELIVERED: 29 AUGUST 2016
FOR THE PLAINTIFFS: MR MGXAJI
INSTRUCTED BY: MESSRS MGXAJI AND CO
3 GELENCOMBE FLATS
45 LEEDS ROAD
MTHATHA
FOR THE DEFENDANTS: MR MTSHABE
INSTRUCTED BY: STATE ATTORNEY
BROADCAST HOUSE
94 SISSION STREET
FORTGALE
MTHATHA
9