ORDER
(a) It is held that the plaintiff’s claim is not a maritime claim as defined in the Act;
(b) The registrar is directed to allocate a case number to the matter in the
ordinary civil jurisdiction of this court, and the plaintiff is given leave to amend
its summons in accordance with the Uniform Rules;
(c) The arrest of the funds in the bank account referred to in the warrant of arrest
is set aside;
(d) The respondent is ordered to pay the costs of the application.
JUDGMENT
Delivered on: 14 February 2022
Ploos van Amstel J
 The applicant in this matter is Borne Logistics CC. It claims to be the owner of
funds in a bank account which have been arrested by the respondent in the
institution of an action in rem. It disputes that the claim made by the respondent is a
maritime claim as defined in the Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation Act 105 of 1983
(‘the Act’) and seeks the setting aside of the arrest.
 The respondent is Zvoimpex a.s., a company whose principal place of
business is in Slovakia. It issued an admiralty summons in rem in this court,
exercising its admiralty jurisdiction, in which the defendant is cited as ‘The Freight
Advanced to Borne Logistics CC and held at First National Bank, 267 Florida Road,
Morningside, paid into bank account number [....]’. The warrant of arrest in rem
refers to ‘the freight being the defendant, in the amount of $180 000situated in or
held at the First National Bank account number [....]’. The return of service records
that pursuant to the warrant of arrest the sheriff had arrested ‘All funds as per
warrant of arrest currently held in account no [....]’.
 A number of issues arose in the papers and during argument. These included
whether the plaintiff’s claim is a maritime claim; whether the funds were capable of
being arrested in rem; and whether the arrest can stand as a security arrest for an
action in personam if there is no valid action in rem.
 I deal firstly with the nature of the claim. If it is not a maritime claim as defined
then the other issues will fall away and the action must proceed in the ordinary civil
jurisdiction of this court.
 The claim arose out of written agreements for the sale of timber logs to the
respondent. Copies of the agreements are annexed to the summons. They were CIF
contracts, with delivery to take place in the ports of Shanghai and Nansha in China.
The first contract was for the sale of 3000 cubic meter of African Pine at a unit price
of USD 129 per cubic meter, for a total price of USD 387 000; the second contract
was for the sale of 5 000 cubic meter at a unit price of USD 138 per cubic meter, for
a total price of USD 690 000; and the third contract for the sale of 1223 cubic meter
at a unit price of USD 148 per cubic meter, for a total price of USD 181 004. All three
contracts provided for the payment of a deposit and the balance against the delivery
of copies of the shipping documents.
 The respondent’s case is that it has made a number of payments to Borne
Logistics in terms of the first two agreements, and that some of the timber was
delivered to it in partial fulfilment of the contracts. It says Borne Logistics however, in
breach of its obligations, failed to deliver the rest of the timber, in consequence of
which it cancelled the contracts and wants the money back in respect of which it has
not received timber.
 Borne Logistics says the respondent’s claim is for restitution in terms of a
contract of sale, which is not a maritime claim. The respondent says a part of what it
paid constituted freight, and to that extent its claim is a maritime claim as defined.
 If a contract of sale is on so-called CIF terms1 the price includes in a lump
sum the cost of the goods and the insurance and freight to the named destination.
The seller is required at his own expense and risk to put the goods into the
possession of a carrier at the port for shipment and obtain a negotiable bill of lading
covering the entire transportation to the named destination; load the goods and
obtain a receipt from the carrier showing that the freight has been paid or provided
for; obtain a policy or certificate of insurance; and prepare and forward the
documents required to effect shipment and comply with the contract.2 The contracts
relating to carriage, freight and insurance are concluded between the seller and the
carrier and insurer respectively. The buyer is not a party to those contracts.
 The payments made by the respondent to Borne Logistics were part
payments in respect of the purchase price of the timber. There was no obligation on
the respondent to pay for the freight. Nor was there an obligation on it to pay the
insurance premium. The fact that the purchase price included the expense that the
seller had to incur in respect of the freight and insurance does not change that.
 Counsel for the respondent submitted that the claim falls under the definition
of maritime claim in s1(1)(h) of the Act, which refers to any claim for, arising out of or
relating to the carriage of goods in a ship, or any agreement for or relating to such
carriage. There is no merit in this submission. The respondent’s claim arises out of
and relates to the purchase by it of timber. The carriage of the timber in a ship, and
the agreement for such carriage, was a matter between the seller and the carrier.
 The submission that the claim could fall under subsection (i) is misplaced as
the claim has nothing to do with a container. Subsection (p) is not applicable as there
Cost, Insurance and Freight.
Marine Cargo Claims, 3rd ed, Tetley, p173; Lendalease Finance (Pty) Ltd v Corporation De
Mercadeo Agricola and Others 1976 (4) SA 464 (AD) 491-2.
SAFLII
was no involvement by any of the persons mentioned there. Nor is subsection (ee) of
any assistance. The claim is for restitution under a contract of sale, which is not a
marine or maritime matter.
 I conclude that the respondent’s claim is not a maritime claim as defined in
the Act. This finding seems to me accord with the decisions in Vidal Armadores SA3
and Minesa Energy4 in this division. This finding also makes it unnecessary to
consider the other points with regard to the effectiveness of arresting an unquantified
part of an indivisible fund in a bank account; and whether the arrest could somehow
be taken to be a security arrest for an action in personam. Suffice it to say that those
points appeared to me to be without substance.
 The matter should therefore, in terms of s7(2)(b) of the Act, proceed in the
ordinary civil jurisdiction of this court.
 The order is as follows:
(a) It is held that the plaintiff’s claim is not a maritime claim as defined in the Act;
(b) The registrar is directed to allocate a case number to the matter in the
ordinary civil jurisdiction of this court, and the plaintiff is given leave to amend
its summons in accordance with the Uniform Rules;
(c) The arrest of the funds in the bank account referred to in the warrant of arrest
is set aside;
(d) The respondent is ordered to pay the costs of the application.
Ploos van Amstel J
Appearances:
For the Applicant : S Anderton
Instructed by : Denver & Darren Attorneys
: Durban
For the 4th & 5th Respondents : A Gevers
Instructed by : D J Dickson & Associates
: Durban
Vidal Armadores SA (Owner of the MFV Galaecia) v Thalassa Export Co Ltd 2006 JDR 0379 (D)
Minesa Energy (Pty) Ltd v Stinnes International AG 1988 (3) SA 903 (D)
Date Judgment Reserved : 04 February 2022
Date of Judgment : 14 February 2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF SOUTH AFRICA
KWAZULU-NATAL LOCAL DIVISION, DURBAN
CASE NO: A04/2022
In the matter between:
BORNE LOGISTICS CC Applicant
and
ZVOIMPEX a.s Respondent/Plaintiff
(Trading as Valasaha a.s)
THE “FREIGHT” ACVANCED TO BORNE LOGISTICS CC Defendant
and held at FIRST NATIONAL BANK, 167 FLORIDA ROAD,
MORNINGSIDE, PAID INTO ACCOUNT NUMBER [....]
AMENDED ORDER
(a) It is held that the plaintiff’s claim is not a maritime claim as defined in the Act;
(b) The registrar is directed to allocate a case number to the matter in the
ordinary civil jurisdiction of this court, and the plaintiff is given leave to amend
its summons in accordance with the Uniform Rules;
(c) The arrest of the funds in the bank account referred to in the warrant of arrest
is set aside;
(d) The respondent is ordered to pay the costs of the application, including those
reserved on 31 January 2022.