judgment was handed down
electronically by circulation to the parties' representatives by
email, by being uploaded to CaseLines and by release to SAFLII.
The date and time for hand-down is deemed to be 11:30 on
September 2025.
Summary: Loan and Special Notarial Bond to secure loan – application to
perfect security – first respondent in breach of loan agreement – applicant
applies for order perfecting its security of pledge in terms of special notarial
bond over listed immovable property – no dispute about respondents
indebtedness to applicants – ordinarily applicants would be entitled to perfect
the security – respondents contending that there was an agreement that they
would only be liable to repay the loan if a third party complied with its alleged
obligations to engage its services as per a contractual arrangement – applicants
deny such agreement – wording of loan agreement belies the respondents
claim – no evidence to support the respondents’ grounds of opposition to the
application –
Pledge perfected – application granted –
Joinder application by respondents to join third party as co-respondent – settled
that the direct and substantial interest test to be satisfied in order to succeed –
direct and substantial interest is the legal interest in the subject-matter of the
case which could be prejudicially affected by the order of the court – not
demonstrated that factually the third party’s right/s to be adversely affected –
Joinder application refused.
ORDER
(1) The respondents’ application for a postponement of part ‘B’ of the main
application is refused.
(2) The respondents’ application dated 28 January 2021 for the joinder to
these proceedings of Sasol South Africa Limited, as a respondent, be and
is hereby dismissed with costs.
(3) The first, second and third respondents, jointly and severally, the one
paying the other to be absolved, shall pay the applicants’ costs of the
joinder application on the scale as between attorney and client, such costs
to include the costs of Counsel on scale ‘C’ of the applicable tariff provided
for in the Uniform Rules of Court.
(4) The applicants be and are hereby declared to be the mortgagee of all the
vehicles, machinery and other equipment listed in annexure ‘FA11’ to the
founding affidavit (‘the mortgaged assets’), annexure ‘FA11’ being an
extract of the mortgaged assets from and as specified in the Special
Notarial Bond registered in the Pretoria Deeds Office on 11 September
under number B[] (‘the Special Notarial Bond’).
(5) The applicants be and are hereby authorised to remove, take into
possession and/or retain possession of the mortgaged assets, and to hold
the said mortgaged assets in accordance with the provisions of the
Special Notarial Bond as security for the first respondent's indebtedness to
it and to dispose of the movable assets in accordance with the provisions
of the Special Notarial Bond.
(6) It be and is hereby declared that the applicants are entitled to execute
against each of the mortgaged assets and that the mortgaged assets are
specially executable.
(7) The sheriff and/or his deputy be and are hereby authorised and directed to
attach, remove and take into possession the mortgaged movable assets
and to hold and retain same, on behalf of the applicants, as security in
terms of the Special Notarial Bond in favour of the applicants, and to take
any and/or such steps necessary to give effect to the said Special Notarial
Bond.
(8) The first, second and third respondents and such other persons who are in
possession of any of the mortgaged assets are hereby ordered and
directed to deliver to the sheriff and/or his deputy or make available the
mortgaged assets for collection by the sheriff and/or his deputy, within ten
days of this court order, failing which the sheriff and/or his deputy be and
is hereby authorised and directed to take such steps as are necessary to
give effect to this Order.
(9) The first, second and third respondents, jointly and severally, the one
paying the other to be absolved, shall pay the applicants’ costs of this
opposed application on the scale as between attorney and client, such
costs to include the costs of part ‘A’ of this application and the costs of
Counsel on scale ‘C’ of the applicable tariff provided for in the Uniform
Rules of Court.
JUDGMENT
Adams J:
. The applicants are the Trustees for the time being of the Sasol Siyakha
Enterprise and Supplier Development Trust, who, in their official capacities as
such, apply in these proceedings to perfect the security the Trust has over
movable property owned by the first respondent (Sematra). I shall refer to the
applicants collectively as ‘the Sasol Siyakha Trust’ or simply as ‘the Trust’. The
second and the third respondents are the shareholders and the sole directors of
Sematra and they also bound themselves as sureties and co-principal debtors
in respect of Sematra’s indebtedness to the Sasol Siyakha Trust.
. This is part ‘B’ of the applicants’ application, in which the Trust applies for
final relief declaring that it is entitled to perfect the security it has in respect of
Sematra’s vehicles, machinery and equipment in terms of a Special Notarial
Bond number B[]. The applicants’ cause of action is based on a written Loan
Agreement concluded between the Trust and Sematra on 27 June 2019, and
the Special Notarial Bond registered in the Deeds Office on 11 September
2020, in terms of which the Trust lent and advanced to Sematra R20 000 000,
repayable by Sematra to the Trust, together with interest thereon and other
charges provided for in the loan agreement, in sixty monthly, therefore over a
period of five years.
. Sematra is and has been since 2020 in breach of the loan agreement in
that it is in arrears with its monthly instalments. It is for this reason that the
Trust, as it is entitled to do in terms of the loan agreement, read with the Special
Notarial Bond, instituted these proceedings with a view to perfecting its security
by attaching and taking control of the ‘mortgaged property’. The respondents do
not dispute Sematra’s indebtedness to the Trust and the Trust’s entitlement to
perfect the security it enjoys in terms of the Special Notarial Bond.
. In that regard, the Special Notarial Bond provides, in express and
unequivocal terms, that in the event of a breach by [Sematra], the Trust would
be entitled to take the following action: -
‘8.1 to declare the full amount of [Sematra’s] indebtedness to the [Trust] from
whatsoever cause arising to be due and payable forthwith and to claim and
recover the same from [Sematra] forthwith on demand;
8.2 if the [Trust] has not already been placed in possession of the Assets, to forthwith
take possession and thereby perfect its pledge of the Assets.
8.3 to hold the Assels as security for the payment of all amounts owing by [Sematra]
to the [Trust] and to retain such possession for so long as the [Trust] may deem
fit;
8.4 to dispose of the Assets or any of them by public auction, public tender, or by
private treaty or otherwise in the [Trust’s] sole discretion and on such terms and
conditions as the [Trust] in its sole discretion may deem fit and to convey good,
valid and free title to the purchaser or transferee thereof;
8.5 to apply for provisional sentence hereunder;
8.8 to employ such other remedies and to take such other steps against [Sematra] as
are allowed in law;
8.7 to recover all costs and charges incurred by the [Trust] In the exercise of its rights
under this bond, including (but without limitation) all costs of storing the Assets
and all legal costs and disbursements.’
. The respondents do, however, oppose the application on the basis of an
alleged contractual relationship which it has or had at the relevant time with
Sasol South Africa Limited (‘SSA’), a well-known public company and the
holding company in the South African Group of Companies. The Sasol Siyakha
Trust was founded by several companies in the Sasol Group of Companies and
was formed to ‘[serve] as a vehicle to assist black suppliers, contractors and
entrepreneurs with the creation, development, funding and accelerated growth
of their enterprises and thereby deliver successful BBBEE [Broad Based Black
Economic Empowerment] enterprises to the local communities in the areas in
which the Sasol Group of companies have a presence, for the benefit of the
Sasol Group’.
. The case on behalf of the respondents is that Sematra was appointed as
a service provider or supplier by Sasol South Africa Limited during 2018 on a
five-year contract term. The vehicles and equipment purchased by Sematra and
which were in fact financed by the loan from the Trust, were secured solely to
service Sasol South Africa Limited. It has been unable to pay the monthly
instalments in terms of the loan agreement, so Sematra’s case goes, due to a
failure on the part of Sasol South Africa Limited and the other companies in the
Sasol Group of Companies to allocate work or sufficient work to it. The case for
the respondents is therefore that it was agreed upon between the Trust and
Sematra that the repayment of the loan amount would be made from the
proceeds of the work allocated to Sematra by the Sasol Group of Companies.
. In their answering affidavit, the respondents put forward their case in
sum as follows: -
‘The agreement is still in force and the first respondent is expected to render services
to the applicant's parent Company, herein Sasol South Africa Limited, using aforesaid
equipment and vehicles for a further period of 3 (three) years. Unless the terms in the
parties' contractual obligations hereto is cancelled, the first respondent must continue
to render services to the applicant's parent Company, herein Sasol South Africa
Limited. The breach in any of the terms in the contract, although the parties have
reciprocal duty to perform, which is considered personal right and same cannot be
enrolled and heard on the urgent court roll hereto.’
. Mr Maleka, Counsel for the respondents, also submitted that, before the
Trust can enforce its rights in terms of the Special Notarial Bond, it is required to
fulfil its main obligation, that being that Sematra, as an appointed supplier of the
Sasol Group of Companies, gets work from the said group.
. The difficulty with the case on behalf of the respondents is simply that it
is bad in law. No nexus – none whatsoever – is established by the evidence
placed before me by the respondents, between the loan agreement and the
conclusion that the loan amount was repayable only in the event of SSA utilising
the services of Sematra from which engagement the latter company would
service the loan account. Sematra, in general and sweeping terms, avers that
there was agreement between the parties that the repayment of the loan
amount by Sematra to the Trust would be dependent on the contractual
relationship between the Sematra and SSA. No details or particulars are
provided by the respondents of this alleged agreement. No allegation is made
as to whether the agreement was expressly in writing or orally or by implication.
The respondents fail to provide details relating to the contractual arrangement
between it and SSA and/or the Sasol Group of Companies. The simple point of
the matter is that the case on behalf of the respondents is not supported by the
evidence before Court.
. The respondents’ case, in any event, loses sight of the fact that the
applicant in this matter, being the Sasol Siyakha Trust, is a legal entity
completely separate and distinct from SSA and the Sasol Group of Companies,
and that is so despite the fact that companies in the Group founded the Trust. It
is trite that a Trust is a legal entity separate from its trustees, its founder and its
beneficiaries.
. For the aforegoing reasons alone, the grounds raised by the respondents
in opposition to the applicant’s application stand to be rejected.
. What is more is that the case on behalf of the respondents is wholly
defeated by the written instruments on which the applicants’ cause is based.
Importantly, the loan agreement makes no mention of the supposed conditions
referenced by the respondents in the answer. The sum total of the reference to
the contractual relationship between Sematra and SSA can be found in the
definitions section of the loan agreement, which provides that ‘the Service
Contract’ means ‘contract CW44231 and all other agreements concluded
between [Sematra] and Sasol South Africa (Pty) Ltd’. The agreement then goes
on to provide in the introduction as follows: -
‘2.1. It is recorded that [Sematra] wishes to borrow the Capital from the [Trust] for
purposes of the Project, and the [Trust] is willing to lend the Capital to [Sematra]
for such purposes, subject to the terms and conditions contained in this
Agreement.’ (Emphasis added).
. Furthermore, and contrary to what is alleged by the respondents, the
loan agreement provides that the assets used in the project and the proceeds
from that project can be used to secure Sematra’s indebtedness to the Trust.
The relevant clauses read as follows: -
‘11.1. As Security for the due, proper and timeous performance by [Sematra] of all its
obligations to the [Trust] in terms this Agreement: -
11.1.1. The member of [Sematra] shall bind himself/herself as Guarantor and co-
principal debtor in solidum with [Sematra] to [the Trust] in terms of a written
Guarantee agreement as set out in Annexure G;
11.1.2. The assets purchased by [Sematra] in terms of the proceeds of this
Agreement, and set out in Annexure F hereto, will be considered to be used
as Security in favour of the [Trust]; and
11.1.3. [Sematra] hereby cedes the proceeds of Contract CW44231 and any other
Contract between Sasol and its affiliate Companies and [Sematra] as
security for the repayment of the debt and the [Trust] is hereby authorized
to recover any outstanding payment from such Contract without prior notice
to [Sematra].’
. From the foregoing it is abundantly clear, as I have already stated, that
the written agreement between the parties, in particular the express wording,
completely defeats the case on behalf of the respondents. Not only does the
agreement not contain the provisions contended for by the respondents, but the
clauses provide for exactly the opposite to what the respondents contend the
agreement was. Moreover, the death knell for the respondents’ case is the
following clause in the loan agreement: -
‘20. Whole Agreement
This Agreement constitutes the whole agreement between the Parties as to the
subject matter hereof and no agreements, representations or warranties between
the Parties regarding the subject matter hereof other than those set out herein
are binding on the Parties,’
. For all of these reasons, I conclude that the grounds on which the
respondents oppose the applicants’ application are bad in law. Accordingly, the
Trust is entitled to the relief claimed in part ‘B’ of the application and the
application should be granted.
. Similarly, the interlocutory application by the respondents to have Sasol
South Africa joined in these proceedings as a fourth respondent is ill-conceived,
ill-advised and equally bad in law. It is settled law that an applicant for the
joinder of a third party is required to meet the direct and substantial interest test
in order to succeed1. What constitutes a direct and substantial interest is the
legal interest in the subject-matter of the case which could be prejudicially
affected by the order of the court. This means that the applicant must show that
SA Riding for the Disabled Association v Regional Land Claims Commissioner 2017 (5) SA 1 (CC) at
5A–D, approving Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality v Greyvenouw CC 2004 (2) SA 81 (SE) at
89B–C.
the third party has a right adversely affected or likely to be affected by the order
sought. But the applicant does not have to satisfy the court at the stage of
joinder that it will succeed. It is sufficient for such applicant to make allegations
which, if proved, would entitle it to relief.
. The point about the joinder application in casu is that, on the evidence
before me, the respondents do not even begin to prove a case against the Trust
based on alleged conditions in the loan agreement, which fly in the face of the
text and the context of the said agreement and the Special Notarial Bond. The
evidence also does not support a sustainable case against Sasol South Africa
Limited. But even if I am wrong in this conclusion, the joinder application should
still fail if for no other reason than the fact the SSA and the Sasol Siyakha Trust
are completely separate legal entities and the fact that one has a contractual
claim against the one, does not mean of necessity that you have a claim against
the other.
. Lastly, during the hearing of the application on 21 May 2025, Mr Maleka
applied for a postponement of the main application on the basis that the
interlocutory joinder application should be adjudicated before the main
application. Submissions were therefore made in support of the granting of the
application for the joinder of SSA. Mr Chavalala opposed the application for a
postponement on the basis that the joinder application was meritless and
should be dismissed, which then meant that the main application could and
should be argued. As I have already held, the joinder application is stillborn and
falls to be dismissed for the reasons already mentioned.
. It follows that the respondents’ application for a postponement of the
main application should be dismissed and an order to that effect is issued.
Costs
. The general rule in matters of costs is that the successful party should be
given his costs, and this rule should not be departed from except where there
are good grounds for doing so, such as misconduct on the part of the
successful party or other exceptional circumstances. See: Myers v Abramson2.
. I can think of no reason why I should deviate from this general rule. The
applicants should therefore be granted its costs of the main application, as well
as the costs relating to the respondents’ joinder application. In that regard, the
loan agreement provides that, in the event of the Trust being required to take
action to enforce its rights, the respondents would be liable for the applicants’
legal costs on the scale as between attorney and own client.
Order
. In the result, I make the following order:
(1) The respondents’ application for a postponement of part ‘B’ of the main
application is refused.
(2) The respondents’ application dated 28 January 2021 for the joinder to
these proceedings of Sasol South Africa Limited, as a respondent, be and
is hereby dismissed with costs.
(3) The first, second and third respondents, jointly and severally, the one
paying the other to be absolved, shall pay the applicants’ costs of the
joinder application on the scale as between attorney and client, such costs
to include the costs of Counsel on scale ‘C’ of the applicable tariff provided
for in the Uniform Rules of Court.
(4) The applicants be and are hereby declared to be the mortgagee of all the
vehicles, machinery and other equipment listed in annexure ‘FA11’ to the
founding affidavit (‘the mortgaged assets’), annexure ‘FA11’ being an
extract of the mortgaged assets from and as specified in the Special
Notarial Bond registered in the Pretoria Deeds Office on 11 September
under number B[] (‘the Special Notarial Bond’).
Myers v Abrahamson 1951(3) SA 438 (C) at 455
(5) The applicants be and are hereby authorised to remove, take into
possession and/or retain possession of the mortgaged assets, and to hold
the said mortgaged assets in accordance with the provisions of the
Special Notarial Bond as security for the first respondent's indebtedness to
it and to dispose of the movable assets in accordance with the provisions
of the Special Notarial Bond.
(6) It be and is hereby declared that the applicants are entitled to execute
against each of the mortgaged assets and that the mortgaged assets are
specially executable.
(7) The sheriff and/or his deputy be and are hereby authorised and directed to
attach, remove and take into possession the mortgaged movable assets
and to hold and retain same, on behalf of the applicants, as security in
terms of the Special Notarial Bond in favour of the applicants, and to take
any and/or such steps necessary to give effect to the said Special Notarial
Bond.
(8) The first, second and third respondents and such other persons who are in
possession of any of the mortgaged assets are hereby ordered and
directed to deliver to the sheriff and/or his deputy or make available the
mortgaged assets for collection by the sheriff and/or his deputy, within ten
days of this court order, failing which the sheriff and/or his deputy be and
is hereby authorised and directed to take such steps as are necessary to
give effect to this Order.
(9) The first, second and third respondents, jointly and severally, the one
paying the other to be absolved, shall pay the applicants’ costs of this
opposed application on the scale as between attorney and client, such
costs to include the costs of part ‘A’ of this application and the costs of
Counsel on scale ‘C’ of the applicable tariff provided for in the Uniform
Rules of Court.

L R ADAMS
Judge of the High Court
Gauteng Division, Johannesburg
HEARD ON: 21 May 2025
September 2025 – Judgment handed
JUDGMENT DATE:
down electronically
FOR THE APPLICANTS: T Chavalala
Mathopo Moshimane Mulangaphuma
INSTRUCTED BY: Incorporated t/a DM5 Incorporated,
Illovo, Sandton
FOR THE RESPONDENTS: K J Maleka
INSTRUCTED BY: Leshilo Incorporated Attorneys, Pretoria