JUDGMENT
delivered on 07 April 2011

SWAIN J
 The appellant challenges the decision of the Magistrate at
Pinetown, in which two preliminary issues, placed before the
Magistrate in terms of Rule 29 (4) of the Magistrates’ Court Rules,
were decided in favour of the respondent.
 The two issues were:
[2.1] Whether the appellant’s notice (plaintiff in the Court a
quo) in terms of Clause 12 of the agreement, was a proper notice, it
being the respondent’s contention (defendant in the Court at quo) that
because the notice was sent by the appellant’s attorney and not the
conveyancer, it was invalid, thereby non-suiting the appellant.
[2.2] Whether the appellant’s alternative cause of action, based
in delict is sustainable in law, it being the respondent’s contention that
it is not.
 Clause 12 of the agreement provides as follows:
“MORA INTEREST
In the event of there being any delay in connection with the registration of
transfer for which the PURCHASER is responsible, the PURCHASER
undertakes, in addition to any payments due in terms of clauses 3 and 8, to pay
interest on the purchase price at the rate of 18% per annum, calculated from the
date on which the PURCHASER is notified in writing by the Conveyancers as
being in mora to date upon which the PURCHASER has ceased to be in mora,
both dates inclusive”.
 It is trite that the provisions of Clause 12 must be interpreted in
the context of the agreement as a whole
Swart v Cape Fabrix (Pty) Ltd.
(1) SA 195 (A) at 202 C
 Additional clauses in the contract, which are relevant to such an
exercise are the following:
[5.1] Clause 3.3 which provides that the amount of
R800,000.00 (referred to in paragraph 6.2 of the Schedule), payable
from the sale of the purchaser’s property
“. shall be paid in accordance with the written directions of the conveyancers
and shall, on their written request be secured by bank, or other guarantees
acceptable to the seller”.
[5.2] Clause 9 which provides that the costs of and incidental
to the preparation and registration of the documents of transfer and
bond, including transfer and stamp duty plus any Value Added Tax
payable on such costs, shall be borne by the purchaser and paid to
the conveyancers “on their request”. It also provides that the
documents related to the transfer shall be prepared and registered by
the seller’s conveyancers, and both parties agreed to supply the
conveyancers “on request” with all documentation and information
necessary, in order to prepare transfer and/or bond documents. They
also undertook to sign all transfer and bond documents “on request by
the said conveyancers”.
[5.3] Clause 15 which provides that in the event of the
purchaser failing to pay any amounts due in terms of the agreement,
or to furnish guarantees on the due date, or in the event of the
purchaser committing a breach of any of the other provisions of the
agreement, the seller is entitled to give written notice requiring the
purchaser to make such payments, or to furnish such guarantee, or to
remedy such breach, within seven days after receipt of the notice. If
the purchaser is still in default at the expiration of the notice, the
seller is entitled to enforce the agreement and/or to declare the full
amount of the purchase price to be immediately due and payable, or
to cancel the agreement. It further provides that whatever action the
seller may choose, shall be without prejudice to the right of the seller
to claim damages.
 It is therefore clear that the parties to the contract, accorded to
the conveyancers, the right to determine when performance was due
by the respondent (purchaser) to the appellant (seller) in terms of the
contract. This is so whether the performance required was the
payment of the balance of the purchase price from the proceeds of
the sale of the respondent’s property, the furnishing of guarantees by
the respondent to secure payment of this amount, the costs of
transfer, as well as the signature of documents to effect transfer.
 Seen in this context the conveyancers would be the party pre-
eminently qualified to determine, for the purposes of Clause 12,
firstly, whether there has been a delay “in connection with the registration
of transfer” and secondly, of greater importance, whether the
respondent “is responsible” for the delay. The clause clearly confers
upon the conveyancers the power to make a value judgment on the
conduct of the respondent and to then notify the respondent in writing
that the respondent in placed in mora. It is also clear that the
conveyancers are conferred with the power, to determine the date
from which the respondent will be deemed to be in mora. It is from
this date that the respondent will be obliged to pay interest at the rate
of eighteen per cent per annum, until the respondent ceases to be in
mora.
 I find it difficult, regard being had to the aforegoing, to accord to
Clause 12 the meaning contended for by the appellant, namely that in
addition to the conveyancers, the appellant enjoyed the right as
seller, to furnish such notice to the respondent, and thereby place the
respondent in mora for the purposes of this Clause. Mr. de Beer S C,
who appeared for the appellant, argued that this was so because
there was nothing in the agreement to prevent the appellant from
giving notice herself. In addition, the conveyancers were nominated
by the appellant as conveyancers in terms of the agreement and it
was therefore permissible for the appellant, as principal, to give the
notice which the conveyancers, as the appellant’s agent, had failed to
do. It is however clear, as submitted by Mr. Collingwood, who
appeared for the respondent, that the mere fact that a conveyancer is
nominated by one of the parties, does not mean that he acts
exclusively as the agent for that party, in all of the functions the
conveyancer performs in terms of the contract. In accepting the
appointment as conveyancer in respect of the transaction between
the appellant and the respondent, the conveyancer became the agent
of both parties.
Basson v Remini & another
(2) SA 322 (N) at 328 A – B
The value judgment which I have found was conferred upon the
conveyancers to determine whether a delay in the registration of
transfer was the responsibility of the respondent, independently of the
appellant, finds support in those cases, referred to by Mr.
Collingwood, where a party to a contract nominates an independent
professional third person who, although an agent of the principal
nominating party, is also required to exercise an independent
professional judgment. Mr. Collingwood submits that the well known
example in building contracts where the principal appoints an
architect, engineer, or quantity surveyor, who is required to exercise
their own professional judgment, as to whether or not the contract
has been performed, or how it is to be performed, finds equal
application on the facts of the present case. It is clear that the status
of such an individual, may depend not only on the wording of the
relevant clause in the contract, but also on the nature of the dispute
Universiteit van Stellenbosch v J A Louw
(4) SA 321 (A) at 337 C
The conveyancers in the present case have obviously not been
vested with the power in question, to determine any disputes between
the parties, but are clearly vested with the power to independently
decide whether the respondent is responsible for any delay in
connection with the registration of transfer and to place the
respondent in mora, as a consequence. That the appellant
possesses an independent power in terms of Clause 12 to decide
that the respondent is responsible for any delay and to give the
necessary notice placing the respondent in mora, purely on the basis
that the appellant nominated the conveyancers concerned, who
therefore occupy a position akin to that of a principal in the law of
agency, is not supported by the provisions of Clause 12.
 Mr. de Beer S C, in aid of his argument submitted that should
the conveyancers refuse, for whatever reason to place the purchaser
in mora, the seller would be left in an intolerable position without
remedy. I find it unnecessary to decide whether the seller in such a
situation would be remediless against the conveyancers because, in
my view, the seller’s remedy is to be found in the provisions of Clause
15. If the purchaser after being called upon to perform by the
conveyancer, fails to pay any amounts due, or fails to furnish
guarantees on due date, or fails to sign any document, the seller
would be entitled independently and in terms of this Clause to afford
the purchaser seven days, within which to remedy the breach. In the
event of the purchaser failing to do so, the seller would have at its
disposal, all of the remedies provided for in Clause 15. In my view,
when Clauses 12 and 15 are examined in the context of the contract
as a whole, it is clear that they provide for two independent avenues
to be pursued, by the conveyancers and the seller respectively, to
compel compliance by the purchaser with her obligations in terms of
the contract, with an obvious bar to the enforcement of inconsistent
remedies. An example of the latter would be where the seller after
due notice to the purchaser in terms of Clause 15, elected to cancel
the contract, this would obviously preclude a claim for interest on the
balance of the purchase price, payable in terms of a notice given by
the conveyancers to the purchaser.
 In the result the appellant’s attorney was not entitled to give
notice to the respondent placing the respondent in mora in terms of
Clause 12.
 Turning to the alternative cause of action based in delict for
payment of damages as a result of the delay in effecting transfer.
The appellant’s cause of action appears to be based upon the
contention that the respondent owed a duty of care to disclose to the
appellant, that there might be delays in the registration of transfer,
arising out of the winding up of the estate of the respondent’s late
husband.
 The following dicta of Grosskopf A J A (as he then was) in
Lillicrap, Wassenaar & Partners v Pilkington Brothers
(1) 475 (A) at 500 F – G and 501 E – F
are apposite.
“In considering whether an extension of Aquilian liability is justified in the present
case, the first question that arises is whether there is a need therefor. In my
view, the answer must be in the negative, at any rate in so far as liability is said
to have arisen while there was a contractual nexus between the parties. While
the contract persisted, each party had adequate and satisfactory remedies if the
other were to have committed a breach. Indeed the very relief claimed by the
respondent could have been granted in an action based on breach of contract”.
“Apart from defining the parties’ respective duties (including the standard of
performance required) a contract may regulate other aspects of the relationship
between the parties. Thus, for instance, it may limit or extend liability, impose
penalties or grant indemnities, provide special methods of settling disputes (eg
by arbitration) etc. A Court should therefore in my view be loath to extend the
law of delict into this area and thereby eliminate provisions which the parties
considered necessary or desirable for their own protection”.
 In the present case the appellant had effective remedies in
terms of Clause 15 to deal with any breach by the respondent. In
addition, Clause 12 made detailed provision for the role of the
conveyancers, in ensuring compliance by the respondent with her
obligations in terms of the agreement. To accord to the appellant a
cause of action based in delict, would have the effect of eliminating
provisions in the agreement, which the parties considered necessary
or desirable, for their own protection.
 The appellant is accordingly not entitled to such an alternative
cause of action based in delict.
The order I make is the following
a) The appeal is dismissed.
b) The appellant is ordered to pay the
respondent’s costs.

K SWAIN J
I agree

BOOYENS A J
Appearances /
Appearances:
For the Appellant : Mr. A. de Beer S C
Instructed by : Patrick Lander Attorney
C/o Tatham Wilkes Inc
For the Respondent : Mr. A. D. Collingwood
Instructed by : Mariam Cassim Associates
Pinetown
Date of hearing : 04 April 2011
Date of Judgment : 07 April 2011